# nixcloud.email

`nixcloud.email` is a part of [nixcloud-webservices](https://github.com/nixcloud/nixcloud-webservices) and focuses on easily operating a mailserver or a mail relay server.

Supported features:

* [x] IMAP support
* [x] POP3 support (optional)
* [x] Greylisting (optional)
* [x] Spamassassin (optional)
* [x] TLS
     * ACME TLS certificates (optional)
     * manual certificates (optional)
* [x] Automatically extend `networking.firewall` with required ports
* [x] virtualMail user abstraction
     * define users/passwords declaratively using Nix
     * maildir folders
     * quota support
     * regular aliases
     * catchall aliases
* [x] DKIM Signing
* [x] Sieve
    * A simple standard script that moves spam
    * Allow user defined sieve scripts
* [x] meaningful mail server defaults for communication with gmail.com & similar
* [x] Mail relay abstraction
* [x] `nixcloud.email` scores 10/10 at https://www.mail-tester.com

Upcoming features:

* [ ] DNS abstraction which shows all the required configuration(s) and if they are correct already
* [ ] Webmail support (Roundcube)
* [ ] Add small command line tool to manage users / passwords (in addition to declarative users/passwords)
* [ ] Rewrite sender mail address when forwarding (SRS) correctly
* [ ] SNI support for Nix Dovecot abstraction
* [ ] Advanced logging
* [ ] Adding group aliases
* [ ] Add mailinglist support

Thanks to the support of nlnet.nl!

# Limitations

* No support for shell users, only virtualUsers. This is by intention to reduce complexity in the backend.
* No support for storing virtualUsers in a database or anything dynamically updatable (but we started to work on this)
* No simple webmail support (but we started to work on this)

# Configuration

See also [../README.md](../README.md).

<!-- See https://nixdoc.io/nixcloud-webservices/index.html#nixcloud -->

## Basic example

    let
      ipAddress = "8.19.10.3";
      ipv6Address = "201:48:11:403::1:1";
    in {
      nixcloud.email= {
        enable = true;
        domains = [ "lastlog.de" "dune2.de" ];
        ipAddress = ipAddress;
        ip6Address = ipv6Address;
        hostname = "mail.lastlog.de";
        users = [
          # see https://wiki.dovecot.org/Authentication/PasswordSchemes
          { name = "js"; domain = "lastlog.de"; password = "{SHA256-CRYPT}$<<<removed by qknight>>>"; }
          { name = "foo1"; domain = "dune2.de"; password = "{PLAIN}asdfasdfasdfasdf"; }
        ];
      };


## DNS entries

In order to use `nixcloud.email` you need to setup your DNS server for your domain. Here is the example configuration for `mail.lastlog.de` mailserver.

### Reverse DNS entries

* 2a01:4f8:221:3744::1:30 mail.lastlog.de
* 88.198.101.30 mail.lastlog.de

### Forward DNS entries

    $TTL 600
    @   IN SOA ns1.first-ns.de. postmaster.robot.first-ns.de. (
        2017121000   ; serial
        14400        ; refresh
        1800         ; retry
        600          ; expire
        86400 )      ; minimum
    
    @                        IN NS      ns1.first-ns.de.
    @                        IN NS      robotns2.second-ns.de.
    @                        IN NS      robotns3.second-ns.com.
    
    @                        IN A       78.47.100.188
    localhost                IN A       127.0.0.1
    mail                     IN A       88.198.101.30
    @                        IN AAAA    2a01:4f8:d15:2609::2
    mail                     IN AAAA    2a01:4f8:221:3744::1:30
    imap                     IN CNAME   mail
    pop                      IN CNAME   mail
    relay                    IN CNAME   mail
    smtp                     IN CNAME   mail
    webmail                  IN CNAME   mail
    @                        IN MX 10   mail
    mail                     IN MX 10   mail
    @                        IN TXT     "v=spf1 mx a ptr ip4:88.198.101.30 ip6:2a01:4f8:221:3744::1:30 ?all"
    mail._domainkey          IN TXT     "v=DKIM1; k=rsa; p=MIGfMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBAQUAA4GNADCBiQKBgQDeQIgtFVgJCI15VoBAvYEbLSn8wS7VWWC7j6fNp8tkrLsliL2zOJg6OZ/mFMXHLZZBQO3VvpK8ZVX9Pzfx4UKSS4AmIS/ZOFIq7PWdy1F3X1J55p6JYodcBKFPDa9akiJ/bx0ovSUY3bgABYNIlh1HTi9BotKb6r/hATZ7YlpFXwIDAQAB"

The only special thing is the `mail._domainkey` which needs to be set for DKIM and can be found in `/var/lib/dkim/keys/mail.txt` once you booted your mailserver. It should be generated by opendkim automatically after bootup, once you configued `nixcloud.email`.
    
## Testing your setup

We tested our mail setup using https://www.mail-tester.com/ which is a really helpful service.

## Creating virtual users

Virtual users are given via the `nixcloud.email.users` option. You can provide a list of attributesets describing a user.

    nixcloud.email.users = [
      { name = "myuser"; domain = "mydomain.tld"; password = "{PLAIN}hello"; }
    ];

This creates a user `myuser@mydomain.tld` with the password `hello`. You should use encrypted passwords.

Passwords are generated using `doveadm`, details are listed at [PasswordSchemes](https://wiki.dovecot.org/Authentication/PasswordSchemes).

    doveadm pw -s SHA512-CRYPT

You should create a user that has an alias for postmaster to follow [RFC822](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc822.txt).

## Using catchall

You can set the `catchallFor` option for a user. Provided a list of domains this user will catch all incoming mails on this domain that are not catched by an alias or a user.

    { name = "joshi"; domain = "example.com"; password = "{PLAIN}linuxFTW"; catchallFor = [ "example.com" ]; }

In this example the user joshi will also get mails addressed to anything@example.com.

You should only use each domain for which you want to set up a catchall *once*.

## Quota

You can set a per user quota by using the `quota` option.

    { name = "eris"; domain = "antifa.gmbh"; password = "{PLAIN}discordia"; quota = "10G"; }

This gives eris a quota of 10 Gigabytes. If you just enter a number without a suffix this is the number of bytes.
The following suffixes can be used:

* `b` for bytes
* `k` for kilobytes
* `M` for megabytes
* `G` for gigabytes
* `T` for terrabytes
* `%`

## Spamassassin

Spamassassin is a spam filter that uses rules and machine learning to detect spam. It can be configured with the `services.spamassassin` config.

Spamassassin will be enabled and configured automatically. If you don't want spamassassin you can use the `nixcloud.email.enableSpamassassin` option.

    nixcloud.email.enableSpamassassin = false;

## Greylisting

Greylisting prevents spam by first declining your mails requiring other mail servers to resend their emails after about 10 minutes. Most spammers don't do this and therefor greylisting helps protect you against spam.

Greylisting will be enabled automatically. If you don't want greylisting you can use the `nixcloud.email.enableGreylisting` option.

    nixcloud.email.enableGreylisting = false;

## Sieve filter setup

Tested with `sieve-0.2.11.xpi` from https://github.com/thsmi/sieve/releases

Settings are:

    Server Name: mail.lastlog.de
    Port: 4190
    Authentication: Use login from IMAP Account
    User Name: js@lastlog.de
    Secure Connection: True
    
We already provide a minimal sieve setup for spamassassin:

    require ["fileinto", "reject", "envelope", "mailbox", "reject"];

    if header :contains "X-Spam-Flag" "YES" {
      fileinto :create "Spam";
      stop;
    }
    
But it can be extended easily!
    
## ACME Let's Encrypt

When using `nixcloud.email.enableACME = true;`, which is a default we automatically acquires a let's encrypt TLS certificate for your mail server. 

This is implemented by starting `nixcloud.reverse-proxy`  on port 80. 

See [nixcloud.reverse-proxy.md](nixcloud.reverse-proxy.md) if you need to connect legacy webservices based on `services.nginx` or `services.httpd` and [nixcloud.webservices.md](nixcloud.webservices.md) if you want to use the nixcloud-webservices infrastructure.

## Providing your own TLS certificate

Use

    nixcloud.email.enableACME = false;

to disable ACME. To provide your own certificate you should set the following options:

    services.postfix = {
      sslCert = "/path/to/your/certificate.pem";
      sslKey = "/path/to/your/key.pem";
    };
    services.dovecot2 = {
      sslServerCert = "/path/to/your/certificate.pem";
      sslServerKey = "/path/to/your/key.pem";
    };

## IMAP setup (thunderbird)

Incoming email:

    Server Name: mail.lastlog.de
    Port: 143
    User Name: js@lastlog.de

    Security Settings:
    Connection security: STARTTLS
    Authentication method: Normal password
    
Outgoing email:

    Server Name: mail.lastlog.de
    Port: 587
    User Name: js@lastlog.de
    Authentication method: Normal password
    Connection security: STARTTLS
    
# Relay setup

`nixcloud.email` provides simple options to configure your mailserver as a relay client which is basically the same as a ssmtp setup but with a mail queue.

If the other mailserver is a mailserver with the default nixcloud email setup you
only need to provide `nixcloud.email.relay.host` and `nixcloud.email.relay.passwords`.

    nixcloud.email.relay = {
      host = "mail.myrelayhost.tld";
      port = 587;
      passwords = {
        "relayUser" = "this1sApla!ntextP4ssw0rd";
      };
    };

The Port 587 is the default port and can therefor be omitted. We strongly suggest
to use the submission port (587) to deliver your emails. The `nixcloud.email.relay.host`
is the host of your relay server.

If you use an open relay you can omit the `nixcloud.email.relay.passwords` option
but we highly suggest you to not use open relays. If your counterpart is a
`nixcloud.email` setup or any other sane mailserver setup that does not use
open relays you need to provide a set of passwords.

Usually one password will be sufficient but you can provide more than one.
In the `nixcloud.email.relay.passwords.<name>` option the name is the user name
and the provided value is the plaintext password.

# Migration

A simple, yet fast strategy is 'rsync+ssh' which is explained here. But you can always just use an IMAP client and copy the mails from your old account as well.

## Copy emails from previous .maildir using rsync (fast)

1. create the email user: js@lastlog.de in the abstraction and 'nixos-rebuild switch'

2. rsync .maildir/ /var/lib/virtualMail/lastlog.de/users/js/mail/

3. chown virtualMail:virtualMail /var/lib/virtualMail/lastlog.de/users/js/mail -r

# Backups

* /etc/nixos/configuration.nix
* revision of `nixpkgs` and `nixcloud-webservices` you were using
* your DNS configuration
* /var/lib/dkim/keys/ <- all files from here
* /var/lib/virtualMail/ <- all files form here

# Links

* [https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/29366](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/29366)
* [https://github.com/r-raymond/nixos-mailserver/issues/13](https://github.com/r-raymond/nixos-mailserver/issues/13)
* [https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/29365](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/29365)

# Alternative implementations

* https://github.com/r-raymond/nixos-mailserver
